[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Strait of Gibraltar,
this majestic channel connecting
the Mediterranean Sea and the
Atlantic Ocean was a recurring
theme in mythology.
The ocean levels were
drastically lower,
making this waterway
a massive canyon.
And the two mountain
ranges along the sides
were known as the
Pillars of Hercules.
What lies beyond
these great pillars
in the powerful Atlantic
Ocean has been a mystery
in the lore and legends.
Atlantis, Atalantis,
and Atlantica
are some of the names
throughout history.
Alternative researchers search
for potential pieces and parts
of this influential empire
all over the planet.
But what happened?
Roughly, 11,600 years ago when
this powerful ancient empire
came to a very abrupt end.
>>GREGG BRADEN: The lost
continent of Atlantis
has been the subject of
stories and fables and music
throughout history.
It's deeply ingrained into
our culture and our memories
as a tradition, but the question
is, did it really exist?
Do we have evidence
that it existed?
And if it did, what does
it mean to us today?
>>ANDREW COLLINS:
The story of Atlantis
is arguably the greatest of
all of the ancient mysteries.
We're talking about a
huge island continent
somewhere out in the
Atlantic Ocean that
thrived, but then was destroyed
in one single night and day
through earthquakes and floods.
And for hundreds of
years, we've tried
to find out where exactly
Atlantis is located.
And to try and find
it, was it closer
to the pillar of Hercules?
In other words, just outside
of the Mediterranean.
Maybe the Canaries.
Maybe the Azores.
Or was it much further away?
We're still looking now.
There is pieces of evidence.
There are archeological remains.
There is possibility
of the survival
of some of the peoples of
Atlantis, both in the Americas
and possibly even in
Europe and Africa.
But it's an enigma that
we have to take a hold,
look at everything
and study everything
almost from the point
of beginning it again.
>>HUGH NEWMAN:
Atlantis can really
be seen as like a
global civilization.
And ideas were spread
around the world.
There was global communication.
There was technology.
There was megalithic
construction.
There may have even had
technology similar to us today.
But because so much
devastation took place,
there's little evidence
apart from a few places
that are being discovered
in relatively recent years.
>>ERICH VON DANIKEN:
One thing is for sure,
Atlantis did exist.
There is no way out.
And we don't know where it is.
There are different
possibilities which
we find in the literature.
Most of it, they say it's
in the Mediterranean Sea.
It was near the island
of Crete, sunk there.
Other says and it's even
written out of Gibraltar where
today the Bermuda Triangle is.
There are different
possibilities.
No one knows for sure
where Atlantis was.
>> Throughout ancient Egypt,
there are many clues that point
to this great civilization
beyond the great pillars
of Hercules.
Strange hieroglyphs in
Egypt in the Temple of Seti
in Abydos depicting what looks
to be a helicopter, plane,
submarine, and Zeppelin have
puzzled alternative researchers
and led to speculation
that this once great
pre-diluvian civilization
reached the height
of our current technology.
The relics buried along
the Nile River bank
likely hold many
more clues to help
us understand the
power and influence
of the mighty Atlantean empire.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: When you
unpack the story of Atlantis,
you realize that it's an
Egyptian story, that it's
the Egyptians trying to come
to terms with or understand who
their divine ancestors were.
And you can only imagine them
around 400 BC looking around
and seeing massive
pyramid complexes
and asking the question, well,
where did these come from?
I mean, traditional
Egyptology says
that they were built in
2500 BC, 1,500 years or so
before the time of Plato.
But yet, they're
writing these stories
telling about an advanced
civilization that existed long
before them.
In the Egyptian oral
tradition, Egypt
was originally called Kem
or Kemet, the Black land
or even the land of gold.
And in the stories,
they're always
referring to divine ancestors
that originally founded Egypt.
And by extension,
we're asked to believe
that these divine ancestors
were perhaps the Atlanteans
and that they were the ones
that were responsible for all
these incredible temples
and much of the technology
that they were seeing
in ancient Egypt.
>>MATTHEW LACROIX: One of
the legendary Egyptian gods
and scribes known as Thoth
left behind his own set
of ancient records known as
the Emerald Tablets of Thoth
in which he describes seeing
the entire story and the legacy
of Atlantis from its primitive
origins of purity of knowledge
to eventually becoming corrupted
by war and empire building.
And Thoth describes how
the survivors of Atlantis
were who came to Egypt to
create the ancient Egyptian
civilization known as Kemet.
Thoth describes how the
technology and knowledge
from Atlantis was
passed to Egypt.
It was there that
he describes how
there was a great hall
known as the Halls of Amenti
where they had a great library.
Contained within this
library was all the knowledge
of the past including Atlantis.
>>MARIA WHEATLEY: The connection
between Egypt and Atlantis,
I think is cultural.
For instance, we've
got mummification.
We've got the extended skulls,
the cranial deformation,
and also, we've got
the practice of magic
with the Book of the Dead.
And we've got pyramid building.
So where did all
of this come from?
Did it just arise
overnight in ancient Egypt,
or was it the
legacy of Atlantis?
So I think the links are
throughout the culture
of ancient Egypt, not just
in the monumental building,
but in its culture and identity.
I think it's a direct
fallout of Atlantis.
>> Historical legends
states that around 450 BCE,
Athenian statesman
and poet, Solon,
traveled from Greece to the
Nile and began studying the ways
of ancient Egypt.
In a temple in the
ancient city of Sais,
there was an elder
priest named Sonchis
that told him of the
tales of Egypt's ancestors
from a lost civilization.
When Solon returned to Greece,
the legend began growing.
And Atlantis was
eventually woven into books
by the philosopher Plato through
his works Timaeus and Critias.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: In a way,
these dialogues are sort of
like Plato's family story.
It's a story that
was passed along
from his ancestor Solon, who 150
years before the time of Plato
had traveled to Egypt.
He was told by the priests
there the point of origin
of the divine ancestors
of the Egyptians
was this island civilization
called Atlantis that
was said to have been located
beyond the Pillars of Hercules
out in the Atlantic Ocean.
No one at this time, save for
maybe the Egyptian king's list
or others, were talking
about civilizations
many, many thousands of
years before Plato's time.
>>ROBERT M. SCHOCH: What
is most interesting to me
is Plato's dating of
the end of Atlantis.
He says it's about 9,000
years before Solon, which
puts us at about approximately
9600 BCE based on our calendar.
So I think that helps confirm
that these traditions were
based on reality,
that there really
was this early cycle
of civilization.
Now, we have to ask
or we have to consider
what happened to
people between the end
of that cycle of civilization
and the reemergence
of civilization?
>>JAHANNAH JAMES:
The idea in the story
of a civilization that
disappear in a deluge
or an island that sinks
under the sea, that
turns up a lot in
India, in Ireland,
in North and South America.
I think that there is lots
of evidence of the story.
Annoyingly, we can't
even verify Plato's texts
because the Temple
of Seti, which
is where the original text
was copied from and recorded
by the ancient Egyptians,
that's fallen into the delta.
And so we can't
even go there now.
I wish we could because
then we could probably
verify the story or the basis
of the story from there.
So at the minute, we just
have to trust the text,
and we just have to go
from what Plato says.
And what we can do is
we can source around.
And we can see what's verifiable
from a scientific point of view
from the geology
and the geography.
And we can put it up against
all the other ancient lore
and see what's similar.
And then you can
create a picture.
It tells a very specific story.
>>FREDDY SILVA: Plato was--
he was a cunning guy.
You can't take
everything at face value
because what was
happening here at the time
is that the Greek culture
is in its ascendancy.
And they're borrowing
things willy-nilly
from the Egyptians,
which we know.
And they're also
borrowing a lot of ideas
from the Indus culture
and the Indian culture.
And we know that because their
main god, Zeus, for example,
was a corruption of
the word dyeus, which
is one of the main gods
in the Indian pantheon.
Part of what Plato
was doing in order
to give the Greek civilization
a perfect foundation from which
to start democracy, he starts
getting the ideas from Solon
of a perfect society.
>>ANDREW COLLINS: Skeptics
who look at the Atlantis story
and say it can't possibly
exist because Solon could not
have seen accounts of the
destruction of a continent
in Egypt, for instance,
are totally wrong.
Every Egyptian temple would
have on their walls what
were known as foundation texts.
And these start with creation
literally and then move
forward the construction
of the first enclosure,
the first temple, the first
city, et cetera, et cetera.
And the fullest
remaining account
of the foundation
text in Egypt is
at a place called Edfu
in the southern part
of the country huge,
great temple complex.
And on the walls there, it talks
about just such a cataclysm.
And what it says
is that there was
this island called
the Island of Creation
or the Island of the Egg.
And that on here, the earliest
beings to inhabit the world
created an enclosure,
the first temple.
And then suddenly, there
was-- something bad happened,
what they refer to as
an enemy snake suddenly
appears in the sky.
And there is a
period of darkness.
And suddenly, the waters
rise up and cover over
this primeval island,
destroying not just the temple
but all of the inhabitants.
>>MATTHEW LACROIX: When
people hear about Atlantis,
many are familiar with
Plato and the work
that he had connected to
the Timaeus and Critias
and descriptions left behind.
But many aren't aware that there
were other Greek philosophers
that knew incredible details
of Atlantis such as Diodorus.
Now, the reason why there
are other individuals that
knew this information
was that Plato was not
the one who was told this from
the temple priests of Sais.
Solon actually told
Socrates as well as
other Greek
philosophers, which is
why the story has to come
from multiple people,
and not one single source.
When we combine the
information from Diodorus
along with Plato, what we
have is a cohesive narrative
that connects with a
very specific time period
that Atlantis was
described as being
destroyed 11,600 years ago.
Now, that time period
matches up not only
when Plato was alive and
existed telling his story,
but matches up with
ice core samples
and geologic evidence
from the Atlantic Ocean
basin of the mid-Atlantic
ridge that if we compare
ancient records,
show us that there
were incredible catastrophes
going on at this exact time
period that's described
by Plato and Diodorus
for the destruction
of Atlantis, matching
both the descriptions
of its location
as well as the time
period that was causing
widespread destruction
all across the Earth
more than 11,000 years ago.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: In
their descriptions,
Plato and Diodorus are emphatic
that Atlantis was originally
a very pious or
righteous civilization.
The emphasis was on their
connection with the gods,
that the Atlanteans
themselves were
considered to be hybrid beings.
They were part
human, part divine.
They were demigods.
And they had been warned,
especially by Zeus
that as long as they adhered
to their spiritual beliefs
and maintained their
piousness and righteousness,
that everything was going
to be fine with Atlantis.
But of course, as
Plato tells the story,
they wavered from that.
And Atlantis then
begins this long decline
into darkness that culminates
with the total destruction
of their civilization in a
single day and a single night.
>> Tales of Atlantis were
prevalent in ancient Greece.
But as with any civilization
that is destroyed by cataclysm,
the evidence to prove
the exact location
has been much harder to find.
>>ANDREW COLLINS: Plato tells us
that the main island was closer
to the actual opposite continent
that he refers to, which I
would take to be the Americas.
And all the indications are
that it was some distance out.
And we can say this
because he says
that where the sunken
land of Atlantis was now
these mud shoals in other
words, very shallow areas of sea
that a vessel could very easily
get grounded on this mud.
Now, various other ancient
writers contemporary to Plato
also talk about
these mud shoals.
And they add something
very vital about them,
and that's the fact
that this area was also
covered in seaweed.
And this tells us that we
are dealing with the Sargasso
Sea, a massive area
between the Azores
and the Bahamas quite
literally covered in seaweed.
>>JAHANNAH JAMES: When I
started to research Atlantis,
and I started looking at it
from a scientific point of view,
the geography and the
geology and saying, OK,
is it plausible
what Plato recorded?
And when you look especially
into the mid-Atlantic and all
of the geology and everything
that's going on there,
it is actually plausible.
It's not impossible.
It was claimed in
like the 1960s.
They sort of did a scan
of the ocean floor,
and they said no, there's
no lost continent there.
And so people kind of
took that and went,
OK, and they started looking for
Atlantis in other places, which
then made the whole Atlantis
search kind of a joke
because you could go,
oh, maybe it was here.
Maybe it was in Australia.
Maybe it was in Antarctica.
And people stopped looking
in the original place
that Plato said it was.
But if we refocus back
to that whole area
and look at what went
down, it turns out
that yes, the middle
of the Atlantic ridge
is an extremely volatile area.
It's on this sort of
trifecta of three plates.
They all meet right
at the Azores.
It's this incredibly
delicate place.
And if any natural
global catastrophe
was going to happen,
I would not want
to be there because
it's the place
that if any island was going
to sink, it would be there.
>> In 1882, American Congressman
and writer, Ignatius L.
Donnelly, published
the book Atlantis,
The Antediluvian World in which
he presented evidence to show
that a sophisticated
civilization known as Atlantis
had once existed and was
destroyed from the same event
in the Bible known
as the Great Flood.
He based this theory on
both Plato's descriptions
of Atlantis and the
date of its destruction.
>>RANDALL CARLSON: Ignatius
Donnelly was a Congressman from
Minnesota who ran for
Congress as much--
with the motive in mind
that he could get access
to the Library of Congress.
And he spent a lot of his
time researching Atlantis.
>>HUGH NEWMAN: And he
actually wrote a book
where he puts lots of ideas
into it, lots of speculation
about what Atlantis
really was, how
it influenced the world,
what these people were doing
at this time, what
technologies they had,
and how it even
influenced other cultures
like Egypt and Mexico and
other places around the world.
>>JAHANNAH JAMES:
Ignatius Donnelly
is really important to the
whole modern story of Atlantis.
So he wrote this book basically
theorizing that Plato,
he was actually talking
about something real.
It wasn't made up and fiction.
And that really took off,
and everybody suddenly
started to get
interested in Atlantis
and suddenly started
looking for Atlantis.
And it became really
fashionable to look for Atlantis
from the 1880s onwards.
>>HUGH NEWMAN: And
his ideas have really
kind of stuck in the
consciousness of many people.
And a lot of people go
along with what he said
as well as what Plato said
and other early writers.
It's the fact that
Atlantis was a genuine land
mass that got destroyed
in the cataclysm
and sunk beneath
the Atlantic Ocean.
>>RANDALL CARLSON: But
now, Ignatius Donnelly
saw that there was evidence
for great catastrophes
during that epoch.
And his trigger for
these catastrophes
was a comet impact.
So in that respect, I think
he was way ahead of his time.
>>JAHANNAH JAMES:
And some people
say that Ignatius Donnelly
was like the godfather
of alternative history.
He's the first one that
really started the, wait,
maybe we could look at something
through a different lens
or maybe these myths and
legends and laws have
some kernel of truth in them.
Let's look for it.
>> As the prophetic tales of
this once great civilization
were woven through
lore and legend,
alternative researchers
were ignited by the wisdom
and accuracy of the dating,
given by the Sleeping Prophet,
Edgar Cayce when a compilation
of excerpts from his earlier
readings called Edgar Cayce on
Atlantis was published in 1968.
>>ANDREW COLLINS: Edgar Cayce is
arguably America's most famous
psychic.
He was known as the
Sleeping Prophet.
As these readings
were taking place,
he would often see past lives of
this particular person standing
or sitting in front of them.
And this could
include information
about lives in Atlantis.
He was able to flesh out areas
that Plato had never got to.
He talked in terms
of their technology,
for instance, crystal technology
and the different experiments
they were doing, the
different temples
that they were constructing
for energy healing.
But he also then talks about
the destruction of Atlantis.
He said it took place
over a period of time
beginning around 50,000 years
ago and ending around 10500 BC.
So that's slightly earlier
than Plato's 9600 BC,
but in the same
ballpark essentially.
And what he said was that
the final remnant of Atlantis
was in the area of the
Bahamas and the Caribbean.
And that this is where we should
look for any evidence of it
rising again quite literally.
And he said, look for this in
1968 or 1969, not too far away,
which it wasn't.
It was just a couple
of decades away.
And indeed, what happened
at this very time 1968,
1969 was the discovery of
this incredible archeological
feature off of the coast of
north island in the Islands
of Bimini in the Bahamas.
>>HUGH NEWMAN: Edgar
Cayce said of Atlantis,
it stretched all the
way virtually to Europe.
And he actually said
Bimini was an area where
it was like the mountaintop
area which was still
now above the water level.
And since then,
the Bimini road has
been found, these huge
underwater megalithic pavements
or roads going throughout
the whole area there.
And so his predictions
came true in that respect.
He also said the Hall of Records
was originally in Atlantis,
ended up in places like
Egypt, the Bahamas,
in the Yucatan of Mexico,
and so on and so forth.
But one of the
things he did say is
that it was destroyed,
the final destruction
at least in around 10000 BC.
Now, it had been around for
thousands of years before that.
Other cataclysms had
happened going back
potentially to 50,000 years,
but the final destruction
where it fully went under the
water was around 10,000 BC.
What's interesting
about that, that
coincides with the
Younger Dryas impact
event within a couple
of hundred years.
So he had some inkling,
even though this
wasn't known about
when Cayce was around,
that a cataclysm had
actually taken place.
And he repeated
that in his readings
over and over again
throughout the years,
which really began
in 1923 when he
got the first piece of
information coming down to him
about Atlantis.
>>MARIA WHEATLEY: I think if
we take Cayce's understanding
of it, it was sophisticated,
you had crystal technology,
and kind of combined
that to Plato,
then I think we can
ground his reality.
>> As alternative researchers
pieced together the story
of Atlantis through
philosophers and mystics,
it is apparent that little of
this once vast empire has been
discovered.
Among the most tangible clues
from Plato's works on Atlantis
is his description of a
circular city structure
and massive canal system.
Areas such as
Mauritania in Africa
share similar features
to Plato's circular city
description, but one continuous
theme around Atlantis
is that it was
swallowed by the sea.
>>MICHAEL JAYE: Plato has a
description of the canals.
That canal system, we
can see on a normal map.
You can go to the west southwest
of the Strait of Gibraltar.
You can look down
there, and you can
see the series of
interconnected canals that
match Plato's description.
It's fascinating.
And what they were
meant to do, they
were built to take water
from the mid-Atlantic ridge.
So it must have been a
nice spring that fed down.
And by creating canals,
they increased stream front
property, right?
So it increased clan
access to fresh water.
The canals were adapted to
the pre-flood ecosystem.
It was warm down there.
The food was abundant.
And the members of this
clan built these canals
to increase access to make
it more livable to increase,
if you will, the
size of their clan.
That was the purpose
of the canals.
>>MARIA WHEATLEY:
So what I see is
the ancient people of Atlantis,
they knew about technology.
When we look at
the circular city,
the metropolis described
by Plato himself
as being three circuits.
Why three circuits?
When we look at
esoteric water divining,
you have the strongest
energy pattern
is three concentric circles.
And those three concentric
circles, I believe and suggest
is why there are three
concentric islands
of the metropolis
described by Plato.
I'm looking beyond
Plato and thinking,
what is the design canon
that lies beneath Atlantis?
And it's Earth energy,
and the power of Gaia
harnessed, not just in the
layout of the circular cities,
but in agriculture itself?
>> Was the area we now call
the Atlantic Ocean mostly land
roughly 12,800 to
12,900 years ago?
How low was the
Mediterranean Sea?
And how mighty did
the Atlantean empire
become before the devastating
events began the Younger Dryas
period?
What happened roughly
11,600 years ago
to cause the flooding
and destruction
of this great empire and the
end of the Younger Dryas?
As alternative researchers
examine the scientific evidence
of ancient Earth
catastrophes, what
other relics from the
ancient Atlantean empire
lay below the surface beyond
the Pillars of Hercules
in the mighty Atlantic Ocean?